[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
I've waited years
to have the esteemed author
and theologian Dr. Matthew Fox
on the set with me.
A man ordained in the Roman
Catholic Church's Dominican
order, his work took on such a
breadth of teaching, much based
on the medieval
Catholic mystics,
that he was expelled from the
order by Cardinal Ratzinger.
Not deterred from his mission
of educating the public
as to the highly refined
spiritual messages offered
by these mystics,
he's with us today
to speak about the life
and times of Hildegard von
Bingen. So wonderful
to finally meet you.
>>MATTHEW FOX: Good to
be with you, Regina.
>>REGINA: I've been
doing this a decade,
and this is the first
time we've sat together,
and I've always loved
your story because
in the tradition of
Hildegard-- and we'll
have a second conversation about
Meister Eckhart-- you, too,
have had to stand for what you
believe should be the roots
and spiritual basis
of any order, really,
and you paid a price for it,
just like they paid a price.
>>FOX: That's true.
>>REGINA: Let's talk
about it a little bit.
Let's talk about what happened,
and how Ratzinger came in,
and what your journey
is, because I consider
that personally-- I know
I'm a bit of rebel--
but a badge of honor--
that you had to move on.
>>FOX: Well, my book called
"Original Blessing" especially
upset the Vatican, and
Cardinal Ratzinger, of course,
was the chief inquisitor
under John Paul II.
>>REGINA: Talk about that
because most people don't even
know that a chief
inquisitor even
exists past the days
of the Inquisition.
>>FOX: Well, of course
he didn't work around
with that title
on him, but he was
head of the Congregation
of Doctrine of Faith,
and they only changed the
name on that in the late '60s.
It used to be called the
Sacred Congregation of the Holy
Inquisition.
So it was the same place.
They met in the same rooms
in the same building,
so that's the pitiful thing
about Pope John Paul's papacy--
is that he brought
the Inquisition back,
because I'm only one of 105
theologians that were haunted,
pursued, kicked out
of their orders.
They lost their livelihood.
Some died of heart attacks.
All this happened under
John Paul II, and with it,
of course, a great
cloud of fear.
It was really a teaching that
everyone should get in line
and quit thinking,
and so you had
the dumbing down of the
Catholic Church in that papacy,
and the result--
part one, the results
was, of course, a
pedophile crisis.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>FOX: Because they started
pointing bishops and cardinals
who didn't do any thinking for
themselves, who were nothing
but yes men-- and so when
a crisis like pedophilia
happened, they didn't
know what to do.
They just got it line and did
what they were told, which was,
of course, illegal and immoral.
I remember when that scandal
broke I was teaching a class,
and a woman stood up.
She said I'm an
executive in business.
She says when this
happens in business,
what goes on first is that the
CEO quits no questions asked.
He just leaves, whereas
in the Catholic Church,
they elevated the CEO,
the cardinal of Boston,
and gave him a promotion,
sent him to Rome,
where he ran a fourth
century basilica.
It was a promotion.
>>REGINA: Do you
think the thought
is, if you elevate them,
you remove them further
from any potential inquiry
from the outside or what?
>>FOX: Well, that was certainly
the case because he literally
left Boston when the Attorney
General of Massachusetts, who
was a Roman Catholic,
came to his door
subpoenaing him to report under
oath, of course, everything
he'd been doing.
Then he fled to Rome,
and of course, he never
returned because he would
have been brought into court.
>>REGINA: And it's
interesting because I've
done other shows that are
completely different, more that
touched on the
subject of pedophilia,
and it's interesting,
because the diocese of Boston
always seems to
come into the story.
>>FOX: Well, they were
the first where it really
hit the national news.
Although actually in
California, there's
a marvelous Sister who blew
the whistle on pedophilia
before the Cardinal
Law thing blew.
She was from the
Santa Rosa diocese,
and she was amazing because
everyone told her to shut up.
She went first to
church officials who
did nothing for three years.
Then she went to a journalist.
Within 48 hours, the story
was all over America,
and she had the
courage to do that.
She paid a price for it, too.
>>REGINA: As many have
throughout history.
We're going to be talking
about some of them,
and the brave ones paid
a very high price, which
we'll talk about, maybe when we
get to our second conversation,
but again, this
notion that you go up
against the church
with the little c,
and this has kind of flowed
through the work of Hildegard,
who we're going to get into in
a moment in that she-- let's
start with the
words original sin.
I think maybe that's
the best place
to begin because it seems
like those words are
at the crux of an old way of
doing religion and the more
mystical and inclusive
way of doing religion,
including Catholicism.
>>FOX: Definitely.
Remember that Jesus never
heard of original sin.
No Jew has ever heard
of original sin.
The first person
who coined the word
was Augustine, Saint Augustine
in the fourth century, which
by the way, is the same century
that the church inherited
the Roman Empire.
If you're going
to run an empire,
original sin is a good idea
because it gets people in line,
and it makes them very obedient,
and they'll go to war for you,
but the truth is that Bible
Genesis 1 says it's good.
It's very good.
Well, original blessing--
blessing means goodness.
It's the Latin
word for goodness.
So the Bible doesn't
begin that way,
and Jews have never
heard of original sin,
so why are you building religion
in Jesus' name on original sin?
Well, because it serves
a certain interest,
and it makes people subservient.
>>REGINA: It creates
a fear factor.
>>FOX: It creates a fear factor.
>>REGINA: Fearful people
are easily controlled.
>>FOX: Exactly, and of course,
it's very, very patriarchal.
Adrienne Rich,
the feminist poet,
talks about the fatalistic
self-hatred that men carry,
and I think that original sin--
it's a very patriarchal thing.
Women, and of course
as more fathers
are present for
childbirth-- it's
hard to believe that this being
you're bringing into the world
somehow has a fundamental
defect and flaw.
>>REGINA: Was brought
in through sin.
>>FOX: Exactly.
And I had Native American
teachers-- one of them
was a Catholic sister,
as well, Franciscan--
who said we can't
believe in original sin.
We know how wonderful
all of nature is,
so we just memorized what
the priest tells us to say
when it's time for baptism.
We give him what
he wants to hear.
Meanwhile, we know that
everything that nature gives
birth to is beautiful and holy.
>>REGINA: And this was very
much the spirit of Hildegard von
Bingen.
>>FOX: Very much the
spirit of Hildegard.
In fact, I'll tell you the
very first time I translated
her works, and I
read her in class--
I read one of her
poems, a marvelous
poem about the dew on the
grasses that cause us to laugh
and all this marvelous imagery--
the first one to speak up,
he said-- this
guy said I've just
come from living 16 years
on an Indian reservation.
That woman you just cited
sounds like the medicine man
who was my spiritual director.
So here you have-- I
was really blown away--
a 12th century German
abbess sounding
like a Native American
teacher in the 20th century.
What is this?
>>REGINA: Well, it
makes sense if you're
talking about essential truths.
>>FOX: Exactly, and the
sacredness of creation.
And what's so wonderful
about these medieval mystics
is that they're premodern
because a modern consciousness
is so anthropocentric.
It's so humancentric,
and so you begin with sin
because humans do
do a lot of sinning.
We're pretty good at it, but you
don't begin with original sin.
Now we know the universe
is 13.8 billion years old,
so there was no sin
until humans came.
That's pretty late in the game.
To talk about the original
blessing that creation has been
is pretty easy to do today given
that the new story from science
of how we got
here-- so we've had
13.8 billion years of blessing
that have gotten us here.
Without many decisions
that the universe made,
we wouldn't have the Earth.
We wouldn't have the oxygen
fine tuned on the Earth.
We wouldn't have all
these marvelous beings
that we share the planet with.
>>REGINA: Nature's bounty.
>>FOX: Nature's bounty,
and it preceded humans,
so it's a blessing,
original blessing,
and we too are part of
the goodness of creation.
Obviously we're also capable
of great harm as well,
and Hildegard speaks
out about that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, she does.
>>FOX: She's very ecological.
>>REGINA: Let's kind of set up
little bit of the background.
First in a broader
category we'll
talk about the Rhineland
mystics, who they were,
and this particular region,
why so much fertility came out
of that region.
>>FOX: Well, I'll tell you the
Celts settled down the Rhine,
and you have to give
them the credit, I think,
for understanding Christianity
very differently from Augustine
and the southern Europeans,
because the Celts never
lost the context of
cosmology and nature,
and the beauty of nature.
They're very close, again,
to Native American awareness
because they were
indigenous like that,
and of course, Ireland
and Wales are not
easy places to survive in.
It's rough living.
Their soil is very shallow,
and it's tough going.
So there is an inner strength
to the Celtic spirit as well,
and Hildegard was raised
to the Celtic monastery,
even though she was German.
The Celts settled in that
area of Germany for sure,
and that's where she
got her basic training.
Not from the guilt ridden
and anthropocentric theology
of Augustine in the south
but from the Celtic approach
to the cosmic Christ, the
Christ of the universe.
>>REGINA: Would that have
been partly an inheritance
of druidism, for example?
Her incredible
connection with nature?
>>FOX: Well, there is
that kind of overlap.
And also Hinduism because really
the Celts come from India,
and so there are greater
hints of Hinduism
in a lot of the Celtic theology.
They have a lot in common,
like the celebration
of birthing and mother god.
You see, the divine
feminine, and Irish women
tend to be very strong, like
Saint Bridget and others,
and so the honoring of
the strength of womanhood
is-- you don't have
the sexism in the North
that you have so
much in the South
because the issue
isn't to control women
or even to control nature
but to get along with nature
and to celebrate it, and to
honor, and to respect it.
>>REGINA: In that conversation
is the relationship
with the cosmic
Christ, and this is
something you've devoted a
good amount of your work to,
as well.
So let's talk about
Christ on the cross
versus the cosmic Christ.
>>FOX: Well, the cosmic
Christ is about the image
of God in every being.
We are all images of God.
In the East, they call
it the Buddha nature--
that every being expresses
an image of the divine.
So it just opens
things up so much.
As you say, it's not
just about the guilt
of Jesus on the cross,
but it's about--
and again, the earliest
writer about the cosmic Christ
is the first writer in
the Christian Bible, Paul.
He talks about Christ
holds everything together
in heaven in the Earth.
That's pretty cosmic,
and that's actually
taken from the wisdom literature
of Israel and the Hebrew Bible,
and of course Christ is the
wisdom, incarnated wisdom.
Now, Hildegard is very aware
that wisdom is feminine.
She has a whole
beautiful vision where
she talks about how the
maker of the world is love,
and love is feminine.
She goes on and on about this
and as pure original blessing
theology, and it comes from the
wisdom literature of Israel.
For example, Book
of Proverbs says,
I, wisdom was with God before
the creation of the world,
playing and delighting to be
with the sons and daughters
of the human race and so forth.
So the whole sense of play,
eros, joy, celebration--
this is everywhere
in Hildegard's work,
and it is the
tradition of wisdom
and of the cosmic Christ.
>>REGINA: Let's talk about
her from an early age.
Set us up and tell us about
her life, her early life,
and where she started really
expressing these divine,
passionate visions.
>>FOX: Well, she was the 10th of
10 children, and at that time,
sometimes when you
had 10 children,
you would tithe the 10th
to the church, so to speak,
but she had visions from the
time she was little girl,
but she didn't share
them with anybody.
And to make a long story short,
when she was a young girl,
she was put in
the care of Jutta,
who was a hermitess associated
with the monastery there.
And by the way,
Celtic monasteries
had men and women in them.
Different wings you might
see, but one monastery,
which again proves the
Celts weren't all hung up
on sex like
Augustine and company
were, and the Church still is.
So she was trained by
Jutta, who obviously
was a very bright
woman, because Hildegard
was a brilliant writer
and thinker and scientist
and musician.
And of course, this Benedictine
tradition into which she
was enfolded was very rich and
of course was-- at that time,
you're in the dark ages--
was keeping things together,
if you will, in terms of
scholarship and leadership
in the Church, but
when Jutta died,
Hildegard was
elected the abbess,
the woman leader in the
monastery, but after a while,
she-- well, when she
wrote her first book,
it became so famous overnight
the pope endorsed it.
>>REGINA: Did he understand it?
>>FOX: I think so,
but he was encouraged
by Bernard of Clairvaux,
who was his friend,
and Bernard was a
big shot, trying
to reform the order
of men while she
was trying to reform the women.
And back then when a
pope approved a book,
it sold better.
Today when they disapprove,
it tends sell better.
That's my experience,
but the truth
is that women flooded the
monastery because they
wanted to study with this
woman, and they were very proud
of her.
Her first book
contained an opera.
It's the oldest
opera in the West.
It contained paintings.
She didn't stick to
just one method at all.
>>REGINA: What an amazing woman.
>>FOX: Amazing woman.
>>REGINA: She was a
force of creativity.
>>FOX: A force of
creativity, and you
could just see it
in that first book.
It's all over the place.
It's marvelous.
There's science, theology.
She hits on
everything, but there
wasn't room in the women's
end of the monastery for all
the women that were coming, so
she asked the men to move over,
and they wouldn't, so
she got up and left
with her women
and their dowries.
Back then a nun had
to have a dowry.
These were upperclass women, and
she created her own monastery--
two of them, eventually--
and she built them.
She was the architect.
I think it was the first
monastery with running water
in it, and we have letters
from the abbot saying,
come back, come
back with your nuns,
and bring their
dowries with them.
>>REGINA: With
them, I read that.
>>FOX: And she said it's
a matter of justice,
and she did not return at all.
>>REGINA: No, and
again in this art
work that we're speaking
of, there was always
the representational kind
of cosmic egg, the feminine,
the birth being given
to all, to the cosmos
through the feminine impulse.
>>FOX: Exactly.
And the cosmos as
a living being.
>>REGINA: Yes, as
>>FOX: And this is
our understanding
of Gaia today, and indeed of
today's postmodern science.
The nearest thing to
the universe today,
as Rupert Sheldrake
the scientist says,
is an organism, whereas
in the modern era
we're thinking of the universe
as a machine as if it's done,
but we know the universe
began smaller than a zygote.
Well, there you go.
12th century thinking.
It was an egg.
And what is an egg?
It's an incipient being.
It's just the
beginning of something.
So evolution is built into
that kind of consciousness,
and not something
to be afraid of.
>>REGINA: Right, and another
beautiful piece of work
was herself having
her awakening,
and again, it was just
like this cosmic fire
coming down into
the top of her head.
Talk about that piece a
little bit and her awakening,
and was she known to have
any kind of migraines
or such with these
visions sometimes?
>>FOX: Yes, she
was quite sickly.
It's amazing she lived
to be well in her 80s
with all the-- let's
just say-- struggles
that she had, but yes.
She tells us that
image that she paints
with the fire coming
down-- this is
like the apostles at Pentecost.
So she's comparing herself
to the apostles at Pentecost.
The Holy Spirit is coming.
She didn't have a bad
opinion of herself.
>>REGINA: No, she did not.
Good for her.
>>FOX: Good for her,
exactly, and good for us.
>>REGINA: And good
for us, because we're
talking about-- the term
you use is pantheism,
and then there's
another one beyond that.
Panentheism?
>>FOX: Panentheism.
>>REGINA: And if you can
talk about that a little bit
as pertains back to
what we were just
talking about with Hildegard,
her perception of self,
of other, of planet, of
plants, of animals, of cosmos?
>>FOX: Well again, the
cosmic Christ that God
is in everything, and
everything is in God.
That's panentheism, and
she saw the world that way,
as mystics do and especially
because she was so nature
centered-- and of course, she
did so much healing through
herbs and stones, even--
>>REGINA: Crystals.
>>FOX: --crystals.
She wrote books on this.
There's a whole clinic
in Germany today
that's been running for,
I think, 40 years now,
which is devoted
entirely to her medicine.
MDs were there and devoted
their life to this,
and they're using
exclusively her medicine,
and a lot of her medicine
is very holistic,
and of course, a
lot of it is diet,
but it's also about--
versus stress.
It's psychological, too.
You see, it's all the
elements of the human
that she incorporates
into her healing process.
>>REGINA: Do you think
that maybe her journey had
to do with the fact that her own
body was rather weak and sickly
and that was part of her search?
>>FOX: I suspect that
probably is part of it,
but also she was the abbess
of many sisters and nuns.
>>REGINA: Well, you
had to have ways
of taking care of each other.
>>FOX: Ways of taking
care of them too.
But she had these
insights about rocks,
about animals,
about diet, plants,
and many of these
insights current doctors
and medicine have substantiated.
>>REGINA: You've written
two previous-- I just
want to bring this up.
You've written two previous
books on Hildegard.
What was it that you
had not yet expressed
in writing this newest one?
>>FOX: Well, I tell you.
What motivated me
to write this book
was that I heard
the pope-- this is
Pope Ratzinger-- was going
to canonize her and name
her a doctor of the church.
Now, there have only
been three other women
named doctor of the church.
>>REGINA: It doesn't make sense.
>>FOX: That's a big deal.
>>FOX: They get rid of
you, but they're going
to essentially canonize her.
What was it Ratzinger
wasn't on to here?
>>FOX: Well, he was
very naive, I think.
My last chapter in
this book is called
"Is Hildegard a Trojan
Horse in the Vatican?"
>>REGINA: I love it.
>>FOX: The answer is
yes because he did not
realize that her big thing
is the divine feminine.
I mean, that's why you
have to believe in irony.
>>REGINA: How
could he miss that?
Had he not read anything by her?
>>FOX: Well, he hadn't
read her correctly.
Everything depends on what
glasses you read people with.
>>REGINA: He didn't look
at her artwork, perhaps?
>>FOX: That's right.
He didn't get it.
He only sees his view of the
world, and you see he's German.
That's why he canonized her.
>>REGINA: Oh,
because she's German.
>>FOX: She's a
famous German saint.
>>REGINA: Well, there you go.
>>FOX: And all that,
but he didn't go deeply.
>>REGINA: Lucky
for the rest of us.
>>FOX: He had no idea
what he was doing,
and I knew he wouldn't.
That's why I had
to rush the book.
I heard in January this was
going to happen in September,
so I looked for a publisher
who would get a book published
before September.
It's very hard to find.
I found this woman,
Constance, in Vancouver,
and she told me
later that I told her
about Hildegard,
whom she had not
heard of-- she was on the
ceiling for three nights,
she said.
She couldn't sleep
she was so excited,
but she came through
just as promised.
Of course, I had to
write the book fast,
but I had been teaching
her for 40 years ago,
and I hadn't written a
book about her in 30 years,
so I had plenty of material,
but I had to rush this thing in,
and then she had
a get it printed,
and it did come out a month
before the canonization.
And I'll tell you,
what the Vatican wrote
when she was declared
an official saint,
was so boring it was
like an encyclopedia
article with facts.
>>REGINA: It didn't
capture her spirit.
>>FOX: None of it.
None.
They didn't get it at all.
They still don't get it.
Of course, it is about the
return of the divine feminine.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
So one of her great
teachings was we
touched on the opposite
at the beginning
the conversation--
original sin-- she
believed in original wisdom.
>>FOX: Exactly.
That was her
phrase, and she says
that we are born with
this wisdom in us,
but it's folded up
like a tent, and she
paints a picture of this,
because we're just so little.
>>REGINA: There's
depiction of it, yes.
>>REGINA: So I'll fold it up.
So she says the process
of growing in life
is setting up this tent, this
tent of wisdom, and remember,
she gets this from John I--
that the word came and set up
his tent among us,
and that, again,
is taken from the wisdom
literature of Israel.
So she paints this
painting, where
she has the-- first she has
the child in the womb receiving
this tent folded up,
but then on the side she
has the stages of a
person setting it up.
>>REGINA: It's
interesting because you
can see in the image
the enslavement
of the soul and
the being as it has
to rise through all
these challenges
like on the right
side of the picture.
>>FOX: Exactly.
Climbing up mountains,
fording rivers.
>>REGINA: Dealing
with the demons.
>>FOX: Wrestling with
alligators and demons-- all
that-- but at the top
then, the tent is set up,
and that's her naming of I
think of what Jung would call
the individuation process,
the process of growing
up and becoming your
true self and your mature
and humanity coming to the fore.
So it's is a marvelous statement
and telling the story of what
it is to be a human being.
>>REGINA: And she
also- one of things
I just loved about her
work as you represented,
is that she believed
in full creativity.
She believed in the erotic
nature of just being alive,
and on the planet, and
having five senses,
and this being our divine right.
She used the term
juicy, which I just
love-- that life-- give us
some more idea of what she did,
what she meant by that.
>>FOX: She says the only
sin in life is drying up,
and she wrote this
to abbots and bishops
and archbishops, and
said you're drying up.
Get out of your libraries.
Do something to get wet and
green and moist and juicy.
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
>>FOX: It's beautiful, and it's
all about creativity, isn't it?
And that word green is
very important to her.
She invented a word
in Latin, "veriditas,"
which means greening
power, and she says
this is a power of creativity.
It's a power of the Holy Spirit.
It's the sap in
the tree, she says.
The Holy Spirit is green.
Now also, of course, green is
the color of the heart chakra.
It's the color of love,
therefore, the middle chakra.
So she's honoring all that.
She even talks about
Christ as a green man
because a green man was very
big in the 12th century.
It came in with the goddess
in the 12th century.
>>REGINA: Yes, talk
about the green man a bit
and the green man
mythology, so to speak.
>>FOX: Well, the
green man is often
depicted with bows coming out
of his fish chakra, his mouth,
and then the bows come around
him like a wreath sometimes,
and in this wreath are birds
singing and grapes growing.
It's all about generativity,
the generativity
of nature, the plant world,
and human beings, and men too.
Remember, she was
living at the time
when the goddess was roaring
into the West in full force.
The last time the goddess
returned to Western culture
was the 12th century as she's
returning now in our time,
but I love with
the goddess comes
the green man on her
coattails, you might say,
because the green
man is to remind us
that men too, have the power
of the goddess within us.
We, too, are generative, and
it gives a much better context
for our sexuality and
for all kinds of issues
that men often stumble over.
>>REGINA: I believe
you said in this book
that it was partly an extension
of your book, "The Hidden
Spirituality of Men," so
let's talk about that flow.
>>FOX: Well, I think the
return of the divine feminine
is one thing, but the divine
feminine, or the goddess,
deserves a worthy
consort, so that
means we've got to
have healthy masculine,
but I think that the truth is
a lot of masculinity has become
sour and toxic the
last few centuries,
and we have to clean
up the masculine
and get to the sacred
masculine again.
So I wrote that book on that
topic, and the key to it what
was I came up with
10 archetypes that
name a healthy masculinity.
The green man is one-- father
sky, spiritual warrior,
hunter gatherer, the blue man.
Hildegard has a whole
painting of the blue man.
>>REGINA: Yes, talk about
the blue man for a moment.
>>FOX: And the blue
man is-- for Hildegard,
she calls it the healing
Christ that's in everybody.
We're all capable of this
power of healing and notice
what the man is doing.
He's doing this, and this is
an archetype for compassion
because it's about putting your
heart energy into your hands,
doing something, but
out of your heart, not
out of fame, or power, and
so on, but out of heart.
So it's an amazing vision
she had of the blue man
that she paints here,
and it's interesting
because Swami Muktanada in the
20th century, a Hindu saint,
had a vision of the blue man
that morphed from being a pearl
entry-- a blue pearl
then into a blue man,
and he said it was the
most powerful meditation
of his life.
It changed him.
He overcame his fear of death.
It empowered him
with his creativity
and especially his power
of compassion and healing.
Well, he writes about that in
the 20th century from the east.
Hildegard wrote about having
a similar vision from the West
in the 12th century.
She also mentions a
pearl in her vision.
Why the pearl?
Well, what is a pearl?
It's an imperfection
in an oyster
that gets worked
over by the sand
and the tides and the ocean.
>>REGINA: To create
this lustrous thing.
>>FOX: To create a gem.
That's who we are.
We got our imperfections, but we
get worked over by life itself,
and we become gem-like.
>>REGINA: This lustrous thing.
>>FOX: Lustrous thing.
>>REGINA: What about the
depictions of Krishna in blue?
>>FOX: Well, Krishna
is a blue man.
That's right.
There's that from the East, too.
>>REGINA: And when we
talk about the green man,
going back into how this
flowed into some of what you've
written about in this
recent Hildegard book,
she was really an ecologist.
She couldn't separate the
cosmos from what we have,
the bounty of Earth itself.
>>FOX: Exactly.
There's one more reason we
have to listen to her today.
She's very strong.
She says humans and
the rest of creation
are bound up in a
web of life, and she
says if humans destroy
the rest of creation,
God will allow creation
to destroy humanity.
Now, notice she's
not saying that God
is going to destroy us,
but the creation is--
the droughts, the hurricanes,
everything that is happening,
the disappearance of
species, of water,
is happening everywhere with
climate change, all this.
She is saying that we are in a
web with the rest of creation.
We better pay attention, and
we'd better be humble enough
not to go around raping it.
So she's very strong.
She says the Earth
must not be injured.
The Earth must not be destroyed.
So she has this
consciousness, again,
that's like Native American,
a consciousness-- we're
part of a web.
The world isn't
here just for us.
The anthropocentrism that's
destroying the planet
finds no home in Hildegard or
really any of these premodern
thinkers as it finds no home
in indigenous consciousness
either.
We're part of a bigger
hoop, as Black Elk says.
>>REGINA: And as
she views it, we
are the co-creators with the
cosmic Christ, the God hat.
>>FOX: That's right.
She uses that term co-creator.
Absolutely, and she's so
keen on our creativity,
and of course, that's
so important today
because what can get us out
of the corner into which we've
painted ourselves
except our creativity.
Like in India today,
they've invented a car
that runs on compressed air.
That's pretty
creative, isn't it?
That might be good
for the planet.
After all, there's no bad no
toxic fumes from all that.
>>REGINA: She would have
been blogging about it.
>>FOX: Exactly.
She would've been creating.
She would have been an engineer
today creating alternatives.
That's what we have to do.
We have to put all kinds of
emphasis on creativity today,
but is this happening
in education?
No.
When there's a credit
crunch on education,
out go theater, out go
music, out go dance and art.
>>REGINA: All the
arts are gone first.
>>FOX: All the arts are gone,
as if that's not what counts
and having a computer
is all that counts.
It's crazy, and Hildegard
would be very vocal about that.
>>REGINA: How did she
express her feelings
about the controlling
patriarchy of the day?
>>FOX: Well, she
didn't keep them in.
>>REGINA: No, she didn't.
>>FOX: She didn't repress them.
She didn't get depressed.
She put them out there.
>>REGINA: It's amazing
what she got away
with saying considering what
other people were burned for.
>>FOX: Absolutely.
She wrote letters to
the emperor telling him
he was acting like a baby
and telling him to man up.
She wrote letters to the pope.
She wrote letters
to the pope saying
he was surrounded
by evil people,
and he was ignoring justice.
She wrote letters
to abbots saying
they acted like
donkeys and bears,
groaning and moaning and
complaining, all the time.
>>REGINA: Asses.
>>FOX: Self-pity.
Oh, she wrote into
bishops-- she preached
all over Germany
and Switzerland,
and her main theme was
the corrupt clergy.
That was her main topic, and
we have a letter from a bishop
saying they're still
talking about your sermon,
and you left three months ago.
Would you send us a
copy of your sermon?
So she did not hold back,
and she was very fierce.
She has a thing about
how the sea of Peter
is going to be
destroyed, and this
is one reason that one of
Martin Luther's early followers,
Osiander-- he said Hildegard
was first Protestant, which
is amazing because she was
400 years before Luther,
and she was a
Benedictine abbess,
but she was a Protestant
insofar as she was protesting.
She did not hold it in.
She was very aware of the
corruption of the clergy.
>>REGINA: Why was she not
taken down in her day?
We'll talk about what
happened later in life,
but while she was so outspoken
and out there among the people,
why wasn't she taken down?
>>FOX: Well, I'll tell you.
I think that they all
heard about her visions,
the hierarchy and
patriarchy, and I
think they were afraid this
might really be authentic,
that she might really be
getting messages from God,
and they didn't want
to Fuss with that.
That's one thing.
Also, of course, an
abbess at that time
was a very powerful figure.
She owned a lot of
land and property,
and it was aristocratic.
They were part of
the ruling classes,
but also remember,
she had the support
of Saint Bernard, who was
a very powerful cleric,
and the support of the pope.
So all that worked to
her favor, I think.
Also, of course, you didn't
have faxes and telephones,
so news traveled
more slowly then.
>>REGINA: Interesting.
Now, another thing
she was noted for
was this very interesting
mystical music
that she produced.
Now, I've never heard her music.
I was hoping to hear it before
we had this conversation so I
could feel it, but first
of all, describe it,
and then we're
going to take a look
and maybe hear a
little bit of it.
>>FOX: Definitely.
It's very special.
I call it erotic
Gregorian chant.
>>REGINA: Yeah, interesting.
>>FOX: Because it's
so much more demanding
than any other Gregorian--
the highs, and the lows-- it's
just amazing, filled with life.
For years, I taught it.
Well, I had people
teach it in my classes,
and every time what happened
was people either quit the class
or they stayed and
got high every class.
>>REGINA: I was going
to ask you that.
>>FOX: Because she demands
so much air to sing.
So it was definitely a form
of yoga or spiritual practice
to sing her music because
it required you to get high,
because you bringing
so much air in
to sing because
it's so demanding,
but she wrote the oldest opera
in the West-- 300 years older
than any other-- and
her music is stunning.
It's just so beautiful
and original.
It is so original and creative.
>>REGINA: And could
it be-- as you
say, it's kind of
all over the place--
that it simply
encompassed so much
more than, say, an
average modern opera might
in terms of the range,
tone, and so forth?
>>FOX: That's true.
I think that's true,
and one musicologist
has said that she anticipated
Mozart and some other more
modern musicians.
>>REGINA: Anticipated
them in what way?
>>FOX: Well, for example,
she introduces motifs,
and then the motif
comes back again,
and you get this, of course,
in a lot of modern music.
And she plays with the music
in an absolutely unique way
for that time in history.
She was an absolute
genius in music.
>>REGINA: And she played
something akin to a zither?
>>FOX: Yes, or an
organum, which is
kind of a pumping
instrument that
creates almost like
an organ, but it
was very portable and small.
>>REGINA: Like a
little concertina?
>>FOX: Something like that, yes.
But remember, she was training
her nuns to sing these parts.
She put on these plays, these
operas, and had them dress up
and everything else.
She has the male in her
life-- her Secretary was
a monk-- he's playing
the devil in this opera,
and he goes around
talking, because she says
heaven is a place of music.
So where the devil
appears, he can't sing.
He can only talk.
By the way, when she was
excommunicated at the age of 81
by the archbishop--
>>REGINA: Took them a while.
>>FOX: Took them
a while, but she
and all of her fellow
nuns-- there official word
is interdict because they
all were excommunicated.
She wrote him a letter saying
you silenced the most beautiful
music on the Rhine,
meaning her own,
because we're being silent.
We're obeying you.
We're not singing
anymore, and she goes on
about-- she says
prophets need music.
Prophets write music.
Prophets make
musical instruments,
but you've silenced the most
beautiful music on the Rhine.
She goes on.
She ends her letter saying,
someday you will go to a place
where there is no music.
>>REGINA: In other words, hell.
>>FOX: Respectfully yours--
in other words, hell.
That's why she hadn't been
canonized for 800 years--
because she told the
archbishop he was going to hell
in the most creative
way anyone's
ever told an archbishop
he's going to hell.
>>REGINA: That's beautiful.
>>FOX: It is very
beautiful, and it tells you
a lot about her personality.
She was not repressive.
>>REGINA: When you have
personally chanted her music,
what is your personal
experience of it?
>>FOX: Well, it takes you into
places of great tranquility
but also into places
of great energy.
And it takes you in places
of joy, in places of silence,
if you will, stillness,
but also places of anger.
>>REGINA: The full
range of expression.
>>FOX: So she runs the gamut
of the human soul, I think.
Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So there's
a BBC documentary that
features some of her music,
and her life and work and art,
so let's take a peek at this
for a couple of minutes, OK?
>>FOX: Good idea.
[MUSIC - HILDEGARD VON BINGEN,
"ORDO VIRTUTUM"]
>>REGINA: I want to see
the entire documentary.
I look forward to that.
>>FOX: I'm going
to give it to you.
>>REGINA: I so look
forward to that.
What a brave soul.
Not just the creativity, the
visions, and understanding,
but what courage, and we forget.
Now you have anonymous
blogsters out there basically
putting a little hate
out into the world
or a little criticism,
and nothing comes of that.
However, in that day,
you risked your life
to say some of these things, and
you risked a very painful death
if the church should
find against you.
She didn't seem to be
concerned because she was so
somehow integrated.
>>FOX: She was not
intimidated by power,
and I think she
trusted her experience,
and her experiences
taught her these things.
Again, remember, she
had these visions
from the time she was a child.
So she was in this communication
with angels, forces,
for her entire life, and
she learned to trust them.
>>REGINA: And so she
became bolder yet.
As life went on, the
visions continued,
and she now says the
visions are the basis
of the new scriptures.
>>FOX: That's right.
She actually says that, yeah.
>>REGINA: Yeah, she said that.
>>FOX: She compares her
writings to the scriptures.
>>REGINA: The new scriptures.
>>FOX: She says people aren't
reading the Bible anymore,
so let them read
my work, she says.
>>REGINA: So let's talk
about her new scriptures
and how that statement
was received in the time.
>>FOX: Well, it was
received very well.
That's the amazing thing.
You see, these abbots
would write letters
to her asking for
spiritual direction.
They would say, you know, I'm
having trouble with my monks
and this and that, and so she
was constantly giving advice.
She wasn't running
from authority.
She was giving
advice to authority.
So it was a different situation.
Now, one thing you
have to remember
about the 12th
century-- and think
of Eleanor of Aquitaine and
the movie "Lion in Winter"
with Katherine Hepburn-- that
was the time, the same time.
And remember, a lot
of the men, especially
the aristocratic
men, the nobles,
had gone off to the Crusades,
so the women were left home
running things.
>>REGINA: Kind of like
in any war, World War II.
They're home making the tires.
>>FOX: Well, that's
true, and so there
was kind of an emergence of
women power, and as I said,
the abbess by definition,
or in law at that time,
was a very strong
person who owned
property and all this stuff.
>>REGINA: So with the men away,
her visions and new scriptures
were taking hold.
>>FOX: That's right.
That's right, and
again, though, she
was so articulate--
her writings are
so powerful and rich,
including her poetry,
that it captures you.
It's hard not to pay attention.
She was brighter probably than
any of the men on the field
there, and yet she
kind of used her--
she would say I'm a simple,
uneducated woman and all this.
So she kind of used that,
I think, pretty skillfully.
>>REGINA: Yeah, self-effacing.
>>FOX: Self-effacing, exactly.
She used all her
charms, I think.
>>REGINA: All of her skills.
And so there's one
quote, "Oh, humans,
why do you live
without passion?"
That was one of my
favorite lines in the book.
>>FOX: I love that too.
Why do you live without passion?
Why do you live without blood?
>>REGINA: Yes, why do
you live without blood?
>>FOX: So she's about passion.
Life is to be lived.
>>REGINA: Including sexuality.
All of it.
It's all part of
nature and life.
>>FOX: Exactly.
All of it.
It is to be lived, and another
place she talks about worship,
and she says that you must be
an alive, enthusiastic offering
on the altar of God.
The worship should
have energy to it.
It's not about finding the right
page to read a prayer from.
It's about developing
energy, about becoming
more of an agent
of transformation,
becoming stronger, more
courageous, more imaginative.
>>REGINA: And so for her,
that's all an expression
of the divine feminine.
And so for her,
the Earth itself is
an expression of the feminine,
so of course, everything
that the Earth offers us is
part of that divine worship
you were just speaking of.
>>FOX: Well, that's right, and
like so many medieval people--
like Francis, who
came right after her.
He was born two
years after she died.
She had an
understanding of Gaia,
of Earth as a living being
that was noble in itself,
and she talks a lot
about how God is round.
She says we are encircled by
the arms of the mystery of God,
and that's very
motherly, you see.
That's part of her imagery
of the divine feminine,
but there are many
examples of her
pushing the divine feminine.
For example, her
talking about Mary--
she calls Mary the
ground of all being.
That's astounding.
>>REGINA: Which was
picked up all throughout--
over the next 800 years,
that same statement was
picked up again by others.
>>FOX: Right, but it
was applied to God.
>>REGINA: To God, exactly.
>>FOX: Not to Mary.
So she has a sense
of the cosmic Mary.
We hear about the
cosmic Christ, but this
is the goddess
she's talking about,
you see, the ground
of all being.
And it's an amazing
phrase, and she
wrote a number of
her poems and songs
to Mary, which she
calls the green shoot.
She gives Mary a lot of
credit for the greening power.
>>REGINA: I was thinking of
Mary in terms of Mother Mary.
>>FOX: Well, yeah, but
she doesn't-- her Mary is
cosmological.
>>REGINA: Is cosmological.
>>FOX: It's not personal.
>>REGINA: So Mother
Mary is an extension
of that in her thinking.
>>FOX: That's right.
>>REGINA: And also, I want to
ask you about Mary Magdalene--
if she ever factored
into any of this.
>>FOX: I don't remember that.
She wrote a lot of songs
about Saint Ursula, who
was a woman who was
raped and murdered
in the Rhineland
before her time,
but it was just the word
was getting on her day
that she and others had
been raped and murdered,
and so she writes more about
Saint Ursula than anybody.
So clearly she was furious,
and she was putting it out
there that we have to
remember the violence that
has done women.
So that, too, is
significant, I think--
that she took up
that cause of Saint
Ursula and her companions.
>>REGINA: So let's also
talk about the vision--
again, this whole
thing, the bounty
of earth, the
juiciness of life--
she had apocalyptic visions
about the future of Earth
that might be wise for us
to pay attention to today.
So can you talk about that?
>>FOX: Well, that's true.
She did.
She warned that-- she talked
about how the clouds are
coming, when everything
will be turned to dark,
and the seeds will
no longer produce,
and darkness will cover
the land if humans
don't enter into a
relationship of justice
with the rest of creation.
So it was kind of
conditional for her.
It was a way of getting
people to wake up,
and of course, that's what
apocalyptic literature is all
about.
It is always about--
it's a form of generating
energy and getting people to
change and be transformed.
So she definitely
invokes that tradition
of the apocalyptic, kind
of the scary possibilities.
>>REGINA: Sounds like she was
getting whiffs of Monsanto
coming in along in
the future, where
the seeds no longer produce.
>>FOX: We don't know
what she was smoking
or what she was eating.
>>REGINA: Well, there you go.
>>FOX: But we do know that
she was digging and finding
all kinds of herbs and maybe
many kinds of mushrooms.
What do we know?
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
Well, I did interview
another author
who said that, if you do look
in a lot of her paintings,
or a number of them,
you'll see the iconography
of the mushroom, which
appears throughout,
and that that may
have had something
to do with some of her
visions, because who knows?
In Germany, of course,
mushroom gathering
is a past time that's
been around for millennia.
>>FOX: That's right.
>>REGINA: And so she
obviously was familiar
with various mushrooms.
>>FOX: Absolutely.
>>REGINA: So it's not
out of the question
to think that she may have
come in contact with some
of these that were more
mind expanding even.
>>FOX: Right, it's
certainly not something
that can be disproved.
>>REGINA: She was an open
woman, and in fact, Jung
called her classic
archetype of the wild woman.
So can we talk about that?
>>FOX: That's marvelous--
the wild woman.
Yes, I have a little chapter
in my book on Hildegard,
putting her in the room with
Clarissa Pinkola Estes, who
has done, I think,
the archetypal book
on the wild woman, and the
two of them think alike.
Again, the wild woman has a
lot to do with creativity.
She also thunders
after injustice,
and she feels life in
the gut, not in the head,
and that's certainly
Hildegard, you see.
Hildegard is not over educated.
She's educated, but
she's not over educated.
She's not running around in
the world of rationality.
She is paying attention to
intuition and to instincts.
>>REGINA: She believed in
the intellect of the heart.
>>FOX: That's right.
That's right-- and
the power of instinct,
and again, this is part
of a shamanistic side,
too, I think-- that
the shaman, too,
puts us in touch
with the animals,
and the animal instincts
that are in all of us,
but then are also in
nature, and she talks a lot.
She paints-- you'll see
so many of her paintings
have animals in them.
And also her teaching
about healing-- she
brings in the animals,
as well, and what
they have to help us with
psychologically and emotionally
and sometimes physically.
So again, she's so
immersed in the breadth
and diversity and
wealth of nature itself.
That is where she
draws her energy,
and one very important
thinker, Thomas Berry,
says that her
mysticism is unique
because it's so nature--
it's nature based eroticism.
He says the nearest
thing to it is paganism--
that she's a pagan--
>>REGINA: That's
why I brought up
the whole notion of the
druidism to begin with, yes.
>>FOX: She's really a
pagan Christian mystic.
>>REGINA: Yes, absolutely.
>>FOX: And this is interesting.
>>REGINA: Yes, that's where
you perk a lot of us up.
And I have one more thing I want
to bring up before we find out
how her life wound
down and such,
and she said Adam's fall from
grace in the Garden of Eden
was a sin of omission,
not commission.
And this goes back to the
original topic of original sin,
so what did she mean by that?
>>FOX: Yeah, it's a very
interesting teaching.
I've not seen it
any other theologia.
She says that Adam only
sniffed the flowers.
If he had spent more time
taking in the complete beauty
of the flowers, he wouldn't
have fallen out of grace
because when you
only sniff at life,
you're always looking for
something more, you see.
So you go into greed.
>>REGINA: The sin of omission.
>>FOX: And so it was
a sin of omission.
He did not drink deeply
enough of the beauty of life.
It's a very stunning and
significant teaching.
>>REGINA: Beautiful.
>>FOX: It's at the heart, I
think, again, of all greed.
I think consumer capitalism
only sniffs at life, you see.
It doesn't find the real
beauty and the real joy
within things and within
oneself, and so it sets us up.
I believe that
consumer capitalism
is built on an ideology
of original sin
because they're really
saying you don't
have what it takes inside you.
You have to go outside for
salvation, buy something.
Hildegard says everything
that's necessary
for life is within us.
That's powerful
teaching, and that to me,
is an affront to
consumer capitalism.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
She is an absolute
woman for our times.
I think everybody that's
watching this right now
is going-- they're going to
be looking for your books,
and online, and searching, and
looking for the documentary,
but let's talk about why now?
What happened to
her all these years?
She went into total obscurity.
>>FOX: She did, and I think
there are many reasons for it.
One is, of course,
patriarchy took over again,
and they consider her crazy
but thanks to her sisters--
her Benedictine sisters
preserved everything--
all her letters, all her books.
>>REGINA: All through the years.
>>FOX: For 800 years.
>>REGINA: 800 years
they protected her work.
>>FOX: Protected her work.
>>REGINA: Amazing.
>>FOX: And in 1945, when the
American bombers were coming
near Bingen, they
packed everything up,
but wisely they photocopied
everything first.
>>REGINA: Thank goodness.
>>FOX: They packed it all up
to take it to a safe place.
That safe place they chose
was Dresden, which means,
of course, they
were all destroyed,
but we have a copy
of everything.
First generation copy.
>>REGINA: Thank God.
>>FOX: Thank God.
Thank the sisters.
>>REGINA: Isn't that amazing?
>>FOX: But it raised
a question in my mind.
Hildegard had these sisters
for 800 years to support her.
How many other women
did great things?
They didn't have a sisterhood
of 800 to preserve them.
How much else has been lost
that women have accomplished
over the centuries?
At least we have this
one Renaissance woman
with all of her richness
to inspire us today,
but it's very sad.
It raises questions.
>>REGINA: It is
sad, but thank you
for taking the time to
document her life so thoroughly
and for being out there
sharing the wisdom she had,
and we're going to have a second
conversation because we're
going to have kind of knocked
on effect of Hildegard
in the next conversation.
Thank you so much.
>>FOX: Thank you.
>>REGINA: Dr. Fox has
written over 30 books, which
you can find in
the usual places,
and in our next
conversation, we'll
speak about an equally
prescient and profound Catholic
mystic, Meister Eckhart, not to
be confused with Eckhart Tolle.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Gaiam TV.
[THEME MUSIC]